Cisco Certified Design Expert Exam v3.1
Both the CCDE Written and the Practical exam focus on High-Level Design (HLD) aspects as well
as business requirements within the context of enterprise network architectures.
Both exams share one single unified blueprint, or exam topics. The CCDE Written Exam will
validate core enterprise network architectures HLD aspects. The CCDE Practical Exam is built to
be modular and provides you the flexibility to focus on your area of expertise in addition to
validating core enterprise architecture HLD aspects. The exams are designed with dual-stack in
mind, so candidates are expected to have solid understanding of both IPv4 and IPv6.
This flexibility is expressed by multiple technology lists. The core technology list contains all
core enterprise architecture technologies (all candidates are expected to know these topics),
and multiple elective technology lists that contain logically grouped technologies, each focusing
on technologies relevant for the electives that the CCDE Practical offers.
Exam Exam topics Technologies
CCDE Written Not applicable
Unified Exam topics Core technologies
CCDE Practical + Chosen elective technologies
exam
CCDE Written Exam
The CCDE Written exam (400-007) validates High-Level Design (HLD) aspects as well as business
requirements within the context of enterprise network architectures. The exam is a two-hour,
multiple-choice test with 90-110 questions that focuses on core enterprise network
architecture HLD aspects. The exam serves as a pre-requisite for the CCDE Practical exam and
provides a way of recertifying your CCIE (as well as lower-level certifications). The exam is
closed book and no outside reference materials are allowed.
For more information on what to expect on your CCDE Written Exam, please refer to:
• The Unified Exam Topics
• The Core technology list
To summarize, these are the requirements for CCDE Written.
Exam topics Technologies
CCDE Written Unified Exam topics Core technologies

The CCDE Written exam is administered at Pearson VUE test centers.
CCDE Practical Exam
The CCDE Practical Exam v3.1 is an 8-hour scenario-based exam that is built to be modular and
provides you the flexibility to focus on your area of expertise, in addition to validating core
enterprise architecture technologies. You will have to choose your elective during the CCDE
Practical exam booking process. This determines the type of scenario you will get as the fourth
and final module of the exam. The first three modules will always be of the Core type, meaning
they are focusing on Enterprise technologies and topologies.
These are the currently offered electives:
1. Large Scale Networks
The Large Scale Networks elective focuses on the aspects of designing large-scale
networks, such as Service Provider networks or large enterprise networks and their
associated technologies.
2. On-Prem and Cloud Services
The On-Prem and Cloud Services elective is centered around design and integration
of business-critical services from a networking perspective. These services may be
placed in an on-premises data center, in the cloud, or a hybrid thereof. A deep
understanding of applications and their requirements, as well as related networking
technologies is expected for this module.
3. Workforce Mobility
The Workforce Mobility elective is focused on the design of solutions that benefit
users in their daily job and routines, allowing them to roam freely across campuses
and buildings without losing access to the services they depend on. This requires a
well-planned and well-designed wireless network to achieve.
4. AI Infrastructure
The AI Infrastructure elective works with the various aspects of designing
infrastructure that enables use of AI/ML applications while also ensuring the
workloads are manageable and able to operate in a secure fashion. Often the
applications have very strict requirements on performance and on the services
offered. This requires specialized technologies and protocols to deliver, and a deep
understanding of these technologies is required.
Technologies and concepts relevant to these are grouped together in elective technology lists.
Each elective has its own corresponding technology list.
For more information on what to expect on your CCDE Practical exam, please refer to:
• Unified Exam Topics
• Core Technology List

• The technology list associated with the elective you intend to select.
This graphic summarizes the above for the CCDE Practical:
Exam topics Technologies
CCDE Practical Unified Exam topics Core + Elective
exam
Practical Exam delivery
The delivery of CCDE Practical exams is administered at Cisco Certification Centers, including
fixed locations and mobile events- Booking your CCDE Practical Exam is done on the Cisco
Expert Level Certifications Tracker portal.
Practical Exam flow
The CCDE 8-hour practical exam contains four two-hour scenarios. Within these scenarios your
skills and abilities in high level network design is validated by making you analyze technical as
well as business requirements, identify relevant solutions to presented challenges, build
implementation plans, and align Enterprise Architecture high level designs to business
outcomes.
Each of the scenarios you encounter during your exam stands on its own; there’s no connection
between them. When you get to the start of a new scenario, you can essentially reset your
mind in preparation for the next scenario, as you will not be required to retain information
from any previous scenario in your exam.
The first three scenarios focus on enterprise architecture core technologies as listed in the core
technology list, while the fourth scenario focuses on your elective and the corresponding
technology list.
As you work your way through a scenario, you will be provided with an extensive set of
information, such as background information and topology drawings that will set the stage for
the scenario you are working on. As the scenario progresses you may be presented with
additional information that, for instance, impact the existing network or marks a new direction
mandated by management.
As the scenario will often place you in the role of a network architect or network consultant, it
is generally suggested that you assume that role from the perspective of your mindset. Do not
spend time trying to map the requirements or design options into configuration sections or
snippets – instead, stay inside the context of the scenario and the question.

Practical Exam scenario details
You have 8 hours in total to complete four scenarios. You have a maximum of two hours for
each scenario. If you complete a scenario in less than two hours, you cannot carry over any of
the unused time to the next scenario.
During the exam, it is not possible to navigate backwards, so once you provide the answer to a
question and move on to the next, your answer is final and cannot be changed.
The point value for the questions will not be shown during the exam. Partial credit might be
available based upon the question intent.
The exam is closed book, but access to relevant documentation on cisco.com is provided.
Practical Exam scoring
Each scenario has both a minimum score and a pass score. Both minimum and pass scores are
set on a per-scenario basis, based upon exam difficulty level.
• The pass score corresponds with expert level competence.
• The minimum score is the absolute minimum score expected from an expert level
candidate.
To pass the exam, candidates need to score higher than or equal to the aggregated pass score
of all four scenarios and score higher than the minimum score set on each of the scenarios
individually.
Each scenario Exam
Cut score pass score *)
AND =
Min score
Score >= Min score Score >= pass score
*) Exam pass score = aggregate of cut
scores of each scenario
If candidates score less than the overall aggregated pass score of all scenarios OR score less
than the minimum score set on one or more of the individual scenarios, they will fail the exam.

Upon passing the exam, candidates will not be provided any additional score details.
Candidates that fail the exam will be given a score report that provides aggregated scoring
percentages across all scenarios on a per-domain level.
Summary
The graphic illustrates key CCDE Practical exam elements.
Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3 Scenario 4
Exam topics Unified Exam Topics
Technology Core Core/elective
List
Format Scenario-based
Total Exam 8 hours
Time
Time/scenario Max 2 hours Max 2 hours Max 2 hours Max 2 hours
Backwards No
navigation
Point values Not shown
Certifications and badges
Badges associated with the CCDE certification program.
• Passing the CCDE Written awards you a "Cisco Certified Design Expert Specialist" badge.
• Passing the CCDE Practical exam awards you with a "Cisco Certified Design Expert (CCDE)” badge
and a "Cisco Certified Design Expert Specialist" badge for the elective you took during your
practical exam.
Available elective badges:
i. Cisco Certified Design Expert Specialist - AI Infrastructure
ii. Cisco Certified Design Expert Specialist - Large Scale Networks
iii. Cisco Certified Design Expert Specialist - On-Prem and Cloud Services
iv. Cisco Certified Design Expert Specialist - Workforce Mobility

