 All right. Endpoint security group is a logical continuation of the previous session because endpoint security group is an evolution of endpoint groups. And so the key reason for this feature is the evolution of deployment of ACI and the need to have a more flexible security group where to put servers, where to put VMs and physical servers. So in order to give you a bit of a perspective on the logic about this feature, let's start from what has become to be called network-centric deployments where you have bridge domain with one EPG. And if you want to have more granular security group, what you would do is you would divide the bridge domain into multiple EPGs. But then what if multiple subnets need to share the same security rules? What if a given security zone? Should encompass multiple servers of different subnets? What you could do before endpoint security groups would be to merge bridge domains and then to create EPGs with a bridge domain that has multiple secondary multiple subnet IP addresses. The problem with this is that while from an ACI perspective, it's fine, it works. It's often not considered because of the shared. Sharing of the broadcast domain among servers of different security zones, which from a security perspective is not really ideal. Even though it has a bunch of tools to reduce flooding and reduce our flooding and so on. So, welcome to endpoint security group with endpoint security group. You can define a security zone consisting of servers of different subnets. And so that's really what this is about. It's a. Similar concept to endpoint group, but it's not constrained by the bridge domain. It's constrained by the instead. So, here's an example of a security policy defined with groups. You would have web app in the same with selectors for the subnet. Sorry for the addresses. It also be subnets, by the way, that belong to the same. Security zone and contract to connect them. So it looks and feels like an. Any basically, you can think of it more or less like an, but again, it's not it's it's really a configuration. The still has a reason to exist because. We've been in the way to map traffic. Coming from a given port on a given Milan to a given bridge domain. So from a. Networking perspective, you have a reason to exist even. Once will become widely adopted. What are the benefits of using? Well, it can simplify greatly the contract configuration because of the ability to aggregate. Host endpoints that. Are now maybe in different spread across multiple. Domains the side effect of this, the positive side effect of this is that it also reduces policy optimization in these kind of scenarios. And then it's also delivers a much cleaner way to do inter filtering. So, we're going to take a look at that. Let's take a look at a concrete example. This helps visualizing. Um, multiple things 1 is the simplification aspect of the configuration of the security configuration. The other aspect is the reduction in number of contracts. So, let's imagine that the requirement is for. Web vms to be able to talk to vms. When I give them a report, so web vms will be in the same security zone. So they need to be able to talk freely and also need to be able to talk freely in their security zone. Given that you have these different bds and these different subnets. Um, if you have to achieve. This goal with today's tools, meaning with as they are today, you would need a contract between. If you want 1 and 1, 2, because they are web vms. Any 2, 3 and 2, 4, because there are vms and these contract will be basically a permit. And then we need a contract to be export to be provided by 2, 3 and 2, 4 and consumed by 1, 1 and 1, 2. In terms of number of. E, pg pairs and associated rules that need to be managed. It's quite a bit of them compare this with a configuration where you just have a contract between the app and the web. So, why is this will be much, much cleaner. So, some of the key points to remember about. Uh, designing for this feature. Well, the. Uh, designing for this feature. Well, the. Hardware requirements, so this is not for for generation leaves. Um, then configuration wise, the are still required and for good reasons, because there are still a number of features that makes sense. To exist on, um, you can configure. Uh, so the last 3 out, uh, still define the connectivity to the last 3 out is still defined as a later out. It's a later external and you can configure a contract between the external. And the. SG. Um, can be configured with service graph. Um, is this with the interview of contracts has got the much. Um, cleaner implementation, and I'm going to show you that. Um, and also includes, uh, as well as prefer groups. Um, so these are some of the key points you need to remember when using. Now, that's some restrictions that are important and. And probably these are. This means that you're not going to deploy today with that fight at all. You're going to. Probably waiting for the next release before you consider deploying this feature. So take a look at the feature try it, but. Probably these restrictions will prevent you from going into production today with this feature. So, um, the only way to classify traffic into today is by matching the IP address of service. Whether it's, um. Um, and probably these are. The tool, or you can also define it with, um, by using session before, for instance. Um, and also the today applies only throughout the traffic, which means that to make sure all the traffic is classified according to the. And even if there is a layer 2 traffic in the, um, you need to. Enable micro segmentation or in isolation in another way, you need to make sure. That the are not are going through the leaf are going through the rather path for the security enforcement to be applied. This is today. This is for 5.0. it's not going to be the case in 5.2 meaning in 5.2. There will be more classification options, which don't require this additional configuration. Okay. The other restriction, which, um. It's debatable whether it's a big 1 or not, but it's that there is no contract. Uh, this is actually more of a choice that we made so that you can. I mean, we want if you're using, then you should plan defining your security zone, scary rules based on not on a mix of any having said that. For the next release, we're working on a classification option, which is much, which. Helps you with the migration by having a 1, 2, 1 mapping initially between for migration purposes. But there are the ways to migrate today. By using busy any or prefer groups, and we're going to show them in a few slides and then to add 2 features that are definitely not implemented are the integration with multi site. As well, as interviewer, I have service graph between these are not implemented yet. And so this is something you need to keep in mind. Again, yeah, if you want to add a couple of questions that they came, if you don't mind 1 that comes very often. Is there anything on the roadmap that will allow 1 and point to belong to multiple. Okay, second question is since specific as you clarify, they're used for networking purposes, right? To map to, et cetera. But if you use a PC tag, yes, geez, a PC, a PC tags, how is this configuring? Are there what kind of mapping if any exists between these 2 entities? Right? So let me address the 1st question. So there is no, I mean, the idea of having an endpoint belonging to multiple as Jesus, something not new that we heard before. There's not going to be such a capability soon. Anytime soon. At least. The idea though, is that there's going to be a way to classify workloads by using matching of tax. So you can define, you can associate each endpoint each VM or each physical endpoint with multiple, you will be able to associate multiple to annotate multiple tax to different endpoints and then to create that are based on matching 1 of these key value pairs. But, but the endpoint has to belong to 1 cannot belong to 2 at the same time. Okay. If what you're trying to achieve is a simplification of. The policy rules definition, because you find it hard to maintain all the rules of for window servers in and for windows servers in a pack. Then the tool is using master basically, define the master, yes, SG for say, Windows servers and master SG for. Uh, Linux servers and master SG for servers and master SG for a pack servers and then when you find the actually PG actually SG for deployment, you inherit the security rules of what is relevant. So, if you're trying to define a rule for windows servers in a pack, you just need to inherit for windows servers in narrative from a pack. And then, if you need to make, make a change just to window servers, just modify the master, yes, you don't need to change on the manually. So that is, I think what you're trying to achieve and I would say it doesn't require for the single is the endpoint to belongs to multiple SG is there either the other way around that the same. It belongs to 1 single SG, but I say me a single SG can pull in security roles from different templates about the 2nd question. The is G is probably not exactly the same way. The key difference is that we are locating global PC tag or global class. It is so they are basically the ones that somehow you see already allocated for interview RF contracts, but basically here, the SG gets them all the time, not just for interviewing filtering. And they get programming hardware the same way as are. Um, you know, I mean, these optimizations are possible, basically, because we're not including 1st, national leads into this into the support for this feature and so some of the caveats or limits that were previously there don't apply anymore. Okay, so let's take a look at the configurations. I think this is going to remove a lot of the mystery from from this feature. The new fields for easy configurations are primarily these ones. I mean, they are the under location profile. You find endpoint security group filled with. Contracts and selector configuration. And then there are these new configurations for interview. Um, filtering, because basically what the coupling the leaking for route from the policy filtering. So these are the route leaking configurations. Uh, for purposes, so basically, which. Subnet should be announced to which we are and whether that subnet can also be. Announced then externally and similarly for routes learn from the outside whether these external routes need to be leaked, which we are for shared layout purposes. And this is a prefix list config basically. So these are the key new areas of configuration that are relevant for. So, the basic configuration step 1st is a configuration step that you will have to do anyway. Uh, which is to tell a traffic from this port and this belongs to these. Hence these BD. Okay. So traffic from these VM also belongs to these into this. So these are configuration make anyway and it's a, I would say a network layer configuration. It's not a security configuration. It's just to say, how do I decide which we are asking? Which bridge domain? Does this belong to for. For what in purposes? Okay. Um, on this, as of this release, you have to do these extra configs we mentioned in the beginning. Basically, to either allow micro segmentation or to do contract with permit, all of something. To make sure traffic becomes sort of quote unquote router traffic. Okay. So that's, uh, as I mentioned, it's as a fight at all, but stay tuned for fighter 1, because there will be other classification options. Which would not need this specific configuration. 2nd step, create an, and then define the selector. So the match expressions, which don't need to be matching could also be a subnet matching. And this is the picture that is associated with this throwing with this screenshot. So these 2, I belong to 1 and these 2, I belong to. So you have your security zone spanning bridge domain. Contract configuration, no brainer, you know about it. Nothing special to say the key point though here is that if you have a contract that is a provider consumed by an, and you try to associate it with any, you cannot do that. Okay, you get a false message on the other hand if you have a layout with a contract and the contract is consumed by the. That is possible because for outside connectivity. Uh, is this are still relying, on later the externals or later where can you see endpoints you go to the operational tab? It's been updated. So you have an operational tab for entries where you see the base for instance. And then under the operational tab, you can see then the endpoints under the PG, and you can see to which or which micro segmented they belong to. So, these are list of configurations that are allowed. They're not allowed. So I've already mentioned the. More important ones, so again, is it with G is allowed by is not and is it to micro segment? Neither. But we already talked about the other ones. Down the last day out configuration is utilized out. It requires pretty much no. Not additional knowledge than what you already have. Um, you can configure the announcement that the, the, the later external contracts the same way as you always did. Um, since we talked earlier about direction, uh, works for. Your fingers or doesn't matter. It equally works in both scenarios. And now with share services, um, I'm highlighting here the difference between, um, with share services and with share services. So there's a big difference because. Um, all these fields, um, so before in with, you need to put, you know, share the between your ads for the subnet and the share between the and not default gateway CI for the summit and the. All this is gone with. You don't need to do any of that anymore. Uh, so the configuration is cleaner because. Your don't need to. You know, don't become an implicit way to pass. Information. Um, and so how is. I had to say no, which subnet should be. Reachable from which. Well, the configuration is performed under this folder interviewer flick route. And so here you're basically saying. Which BD subnet should be announced. To which or lake to which we are. Okay. Um. And so that is an explicit definition of. Of route licking, which is independent of the traffic filtering. So it's much more clean and. Easy to see then figuring it out based on subnets and contracts and so on. So, all these fields that. Still exist that still use for regular if you don't use, but if you plan to use, you don't need to configure any of those. You can go to a centralized. I space for interviewer afflict routes and that's where you. Tell I, which subnet should be late where. And similarly for the share layout, although the configuration for later out is. Basically the same between the. Um, the with shell life out because of the, you know, these new options for sharing the share out control option is not necessary anymore. Uh, and. And it's replaced by explicit definition of. Which subnet should be leaked to which. And so this is the same example with the latest consumer. So, the saving in terms of configuration or the cleanup in terms of configuration is even more evident because you don't need any more subnets under the. So, this is all gone. And then the configuration that you need to use is, well, from to the for the later out. So, to be able to announce. Be the subnet from a different and to be able to announce it outside. The configuration place is the same we're describing before so this area here where you can tell. Not just that this subnet is. Subnet. Subnet has to go to be RFP, but you're also telling the system that this is to be announced externally. And then to announce external summit. To inside of, um, you have these other configuration external prefixes. Which is basically a prefix list, so with the less than or equal or greater than or equal fields. So, to match external subnets. Subnet. learned from the legacy out and to tell ACI to which VRF they need to be propagated or leaked. Contracts, configuration, nothing special here, so nothing new that you don't already know. In terms of layer 4, layer 7 services, with service graph, there is really nothing to know more than what you already know. You can associate service graph with a contract. Now you may ask, okay, how about the hidden service EPGs or shadow EPGs that ACI creates behind the scenes? ACI takes care of that. When these are associated with an ESG, ACI will take care of giving them a global class ID so that they communicate with the ESG. So, in practice, from your perspective, there's a lot of things that you can do to make sure that the service graph is associated with the contract. There's nothing that you need to consider that is specific to ESGs. One other important, yeah. Maybe one thing that's one question that comes up often, and you may help with that is, you show the new way of doing route leaking, right? Are there any plans to use that also between EPGs or will always be only limited to EPGs? I think so. We heard this question many times right now. This is really for ESGs. But if we keep hearing this question about porting this new way of linking to EPGs, then we should consider it. But as of today, there's no change planned for at least for the K release. If it's a lot of people, I mean, if you find this a bit like, we do a much more cleaner way to do. Who are flicking and you think you need. To have it also with EPGs it's interesting to know. Because maybe we need to think about implementing it. And the other quick question, if you don't mind a gentleman was asking about potential support for nested. Right is there any plan or. Is saying create an ESG. We, this content other. Is. G. is. Well, we already have the inheritance feature. Right, so the native feature work with the. Yes, that's okay. Okay. I mean, I'm not sure if it was exactly what he was asking about, but we have that line. No worries. Okay. Okay, resource deployment in ESG. So, that's 1. okay. This is a bit of a more of a geeky point. Maybe. If you are half asleep, you don't want to fall asleep furthermore by listening to this, but it's about the deployment of hardware resources on the leads. So, if you know that ACI deploys an API on a leaf, and then a subnet based on the other subnets are deployed based on contracts. When you're using. Yes, G, all the subnets of all the are deployed on all the leads where the is present. Because we cannot know beforehand, which. Subnets are in each is G, it could be any subnet of the. So there is this extra. Routes element in the LPM table, so not a big deal, but just for you to know. In terms of scale, I was that uses the global class ideas and so you would also think about. Okay. How does this scale? How many can we have? So, the max number of per fabric is 10 K. Because we're using this global PC tag and so there's also a way to monitor the utilization of these tags. I think. I mean, 10,000 security zones should be. We hope and think it's enough if it's not time we like to hear your use cases. The number of is validated today and also recommended is 1 K. Yes. Yes. And so it's not just the, you know, just throwing a coin in the air number. This is really about we observe some slowness. We need to optimize some software to. We have more than 1 K per. And then this is the number of contracts, so this is how to calculate the, the number of contracts that you can. Uh, safely use again, also limits here. Um. So, capacity dashboard have to you with keeping an eye on the resources, both number of endpoints security groups as well as the number of global PC tax. So, global stack, there's more than the security groups and that's because they're used also for other things than just. Um, so this allows you to keep an eye on utilization. So, this is the, probably the only thing. That it's a bit more complicated compared to regular is that you need to. Well, here we are packing all the different options into this life. So it seems more complex and really. The key point is, because of the IP based selector, you need to make sure either that you allow micro segmentation if you're using the domain. Or, you know, the other case is that you allow you put into isolation with proxy out or that you. Put an contract and so on now, if your use case for is not. To pull small server subnets from different spread all over the place. But if your use case is actually aggregate. Where you have 1, B, D, per, sorry. Then you don't need to bother about this. Okay. It's very easy. So, this is only. The case where you need to pull several from here and from there, and they're spread across different and different. So, then you need to do this, but otherwise. If your use case is, I have, you know, on different I mean, I have 1 to 1 and then I have. No, 4, but they're really the same security zone, the same as G, then you don't need to bother about this. Now, future selector don't have this requirement because we're going to have them also based on my. And so they're going to be more flexibility and then you can match, you know, we're planning to have this annotation and the match that criteria to help facilitate the creation of. So, in terms of migration as of today, if you need to migrate from, if it's just 3, it's just 2 key tools you can use. Well, 1, of course, is the forklift upgrade, which is the more disruptive option. But then you can also leverage the fact that can coexist in the same. Or in the same preferred group, so, as an example, if you have 1 and 2, that are really the same security zone. And this is today's config, then what you can do is you start providing the contract from that is consumed by then you consolidate the into 1 and then you associate with. Well, any catches also the traffic. So, it's a simple config. Uh, and then, you can start removing and hoping them to and then you can finally move everything to configuration the same approach we prefer group. So you can start with you have today's config, then you can start putting the into the preferred group and the sales group, then you remove for it and then you have sales and in the same preferred group. And then you take it from there. Okay. So what are we working on to improve, especially in the next release in the fighter to release or K release? There is something that is really much a migration tool. So you looked at 2 migrations based on preferred groups and busy any, but we're adding a selector where you can say under match belongs to this. So it may becomes very easy for migration purposes to have a 1 to 1 mapping between these. So that should help a lot tremendously really for migration. Um, I'm purposely using not the right, not exactly the correct naming and because I'm oversimplifying and also it's work in progress. So don't get stuck on the exact name of the tags. Uh, and then there's a tax selector tax selector means that you have, you can define endpoint matching. So you can say these Mac on these BD for instance. Is to be annotated with a key, which is ESG and you can have multiple annotation keys and then within the, you can match the specific keys of endpoints you want to aggregate under a given. So this is what is going on to simplify the configuration and this is what's going on. You could use this. For both configuration, the final config, but we think, it's mostly for migration purposes. So this is. This is what we're working on. We're also working on bringing parity between or verifying that things are working correctly between existing features and. So, for instance, there's work in progress for, say, any servers 1st, top security advertisement endpoint reach ability. So all these are being worked on to make sure that compatible with all the other features again interview service graph and multi site. They're still not going to happen in the. So keep that in mind if that's an important item also, let us know. So that's all I have. Yes, so, yes, it's an evolution of. And the key idea is really to make the PG moving forward more of a networking construct and shifting all the security enforcement policies. 3. And so that will not have to have subnets for flicking and all these other things that don't really belong to a security policy. And. So, we're also decoupling the control plane or routing configuration from the security configuration. And that's why you see, you know, all these new options to announce or the crowds to different in a more clear way than the implicit way that we use so far. Maury maybe last point to close your view. What do you expect to happen? I mean, do you envision customer to continue use both? I mean, because. Yeah, so, I mean, I guess. Okay. I mean, I don't know if forecast the future is particularly easy, given that we see whether forecast how they work and so on, but or financial forecast. But. Um, okay. Yeah, I mean, I guess. Ideally, and, I guess Matthew would agree with me, too. Um, if we. We would like to see a g replace bts from the perspective of security policies, because then you make much more flexible. It's dependent on bridge domain. So you can tune your branch domains for networking things and it's completely own stoghnaw from the security policies. So. He makes a lot of sense, so, ideally would like to see that once we complete the features, and it's a Bible. For deployments. Feature, right? that people transition to the ESG concept and the EPGs will still be there. But like today, maybe under the same BD, if you're doing application-centric, you have three different or four different EPGs. While moving forward, probably you don't need three EPGs. You just need then maybe one EPG because you just need to have a mapping tool to map traffic to the BD and the BRF. Also, there's no restriction. Like you don't have to – if you're doing already application-centric with multiple EPGs, you don't have to go from multiple EPGs to only one per BD because the classifier can catch traffic regardless of which EPG it's coming from. So again, we're trying to make this flexible, and I guess we like to see this replacing EPGs in the long run. But first, it doesn't happen overnight, and second, forecasting is always difficult. And we need future parity, obviously. And we need future parity, obviously. Yeah, exactly. Okay, thank you.